[WIP] First draft guideline for licensing (#20)
lasp/developer-guide: guidelines/licensing.md

# Licensing

Licenses provide legally binding guidelines for the use and distribution of software and data. Licenses can be proprietary
or free and open source.

## Purpose for this guideline
In Data Systems, many of our code repositories are open source. An open source license gives others explicit permission to
use any part of the code legally. This guide provides options for choosing the right license for your project.

## Options for this guideline

### Software

To avoid copyright concerns, it is recommended that:
1. Any software created by LASP is properly licensed to provide sufficient guidance on their usage

> 2. Any software used by LASP are licenced and used accordingly to protect against potential legal action from the owner of that intellectual property

Reviewer: Typo in "licenced" (since the majority of us aren't British/Canadian)

The following table is taken from The Turing Way and shows the
different categories of licenses available and the types of licenses that support their respective requirements.

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th colspan="3">Free</th>
            <th rowspan="3">Proprietary</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th colspan="2">Copyleft</th>
            <th rowspan="2">Permissive</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>Strong</th>
            <th>Weak</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
        <td>GPL<sup>1</sup> CDDL<sup>2</sup></td>
        <td>LGPL<sup>3</sup> MPL<sup>4</sup></td>
        <td>BSD<sup>5</sup> MIT<sup>6</sup> Apache</td>
            <td>Research Only: No&nbsp;copying, No&nbsp;modification</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
    <caption>
      <div class="footnote">
        <sup>1</sup>GPL: GNU General Public License <sup>2</sup>CDDL: Common Development and Distribution License <sup>3</sup>LGPL: GNU Lesser General Public License <sup>4</sup> MPL: Mozilla Public License <sup>5</sup> BSD: Berkeley Software Distribution <sup>6</sup> MIT: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
      </div>

> </caption>

Author: Yes, this is weird. I'll fix the layout

</table>

Free Licenses are classified as Copyleft or Permissive. Copyleft licenses (GPL-style) say that all derivative works must preserve the same rights as the original work. So, if it is an open-source program currently, you can NOT use that code in your closed-source program. Because of this, many people don’t consider this as “open” as the more permissive licenses that would allow someone else to use their code in a commercial closed-source product.

> In general, choose a permissive license for your project in Data Systems (***Are there instances where we would need a more restrictive license?***).

Reviewer: I can't think of instances currently, and if there was a case then we wouldn't necessarily be compliant with SPD-41A. I think the current wording is good, for now.

A creative commons license can be used to restrict who can use data and how they use it.

Creative Commons: https://creativecommons.org/choose/

Data rights qualifiers
* BY – Credit must be given to you, the creator.
* NC – Only noncommercial use of your work is permitted.
* ND – No derivatives or adaptations of your work are permitted.
* SA – Adaptations must be shared under the same terms.

You can mix and match the qualifiers on the data rights depending on what limitations you want to enact on the data you’re distributing/producing.

* CC0 1.0 - dedicate your work to the public domain, no copyright
* CC BY 4.0 - Anyone can use the data/work, even for commercial purposes, but credit must be given to you
* CC BY-NC 4.0 – Anyone can use the data/work, but NOT for commercial purposes (i.e. others can’t use your work to sell their software or product)
* CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 – Anyone can use the data/work, but NOT for commercial purposes and NO derivate works (adaptations).
* CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 – Anyone can use the data/work, but NOT for commercial purposes and the work must be shared alike (SA), meaning it must have the same terms of use.

## How to apply this guideline

### Software

> 1. Make sure that you put the license file in the root directory and call it “LICENSE” or “LICENSE.md” so that the code repository (GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket) can immediately identify what license your code is released under and let contributors know.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Make sure that you put the license file in the root directory and call it `LICENSE` or `LICENSE.md` so that the code repository (GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket) can immediately identify what license your code is released under and let contributors know.
```

Minor nit-pick here, but I would like to get in the habit of using [code style syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#code) for things like filenames, code snippets, etc.

> 2. Fill out the copyright, noting that it is NOT LASP, but Regents of CU.
> Copyright (c) 2020, Regents of the University of Colorado

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Fill out the copyright, noting that it is NOT LASP, but Regents of CU. (i.e. `Copyright (c) YYYY, Regents of the University of Colorado`)
```

3. Get a DOI for major version software releases: https://zenodo.org/ and link it to the LASP community in Zenodo.
4. CU Venture Partners (CU lawyers) recommend using BSD-3 license.

> 

Reviewer: For data, on the TSIS SIM project at least, we make a DOI for each data release through CU Scholars. CU Scholars might actually be the right place for us to mint DOIs, over Zenodo.... we should clarify when to use either and if there is a preference (I don't know that there is). I know that the CU Scholar process for getting a DOI for the data is NOT simple or straight forward and I wrote up some documentation for this for TSIS SIM (under [this](https://confluence.lasp.colorado.edu/display/DS/Release+Checklist+for+V11#ReleaseChecklistforV11-ReleaseCloseoutTasks) section in the release checklist).  The Data Management documentation on Confluence references DataCite but I don't know that that is current. This is likely a question for Doug Lindholm.

Author: Thanks for sharing your documentation! We should think about how we want to cover licensing and attribution. Should they both go into the same guide or be separate guides? Zenodo is mentioned in this draft because it was in the original confluence document about licensing, but it doesn't have to be included here.

Author: Zenodo has nice integration with github to automatically mint DOIs for new releases. I think this is one reason it's popular for software. I hadn't heard of it until I started working here at LASP. I didn't know about CU scholars until you mentioned it here. I agree that clarification on when to use these options would be great.

Reviewer 2: I think either way would work (that is, one guideline document for licensing + DOI, or one guideline document for each). My instinct leans towards having separate guidelines, since a reader might already have their licensing figured out and just wants info on DOIs, or vice-versa.
